---
layout: post
title: Hello, World
---

I recently started listening to Reply All, whose tagline is "A podcast about the Internet." As you can imagine from this description, each episode analyzes a facet of the Internet - social media disasters, the domain name registration market, what online dating is like for 60-year-old women. The hosts of Reply All, who are young and hip, are prone to saying things like "That appeals to me _intellectually_ because...", which seems like a stupidly obvious statement to precede any analysis, but it's very reasonable. The Internet is such a Wild West of actual stupidity that serious discussion of its content often does need a disclaimer.

This is the reason I find the podcast compelling: for the last few years or so, I have been feeling increasingly nostalgic for an Internet that no longer exists. Reply All profiles new Internet phenomena, but many episodes also center on stories about the early Internet - an interview with the man who created the first pop-up ad on tripod.com in the mid-'90s, a brief history of the origin of YTMND, a profile of Jenny, the first camgirl and star of Jennycam. Many of these stories precede my awareness of the Internet, as I was too young. But I first started blogging on Blogger.com in 2002, back when the website was still in its pre-Google infancy, and I vividly remember Ebaum's World, Yahoo Groups, and the summer after seventh grade when I spent all of my time learning HTML in order to create websites on Geocities. It's been over ten years since then, and almost everything I used to do online is now defunct or has been replaced by a shinier new thing. The Internet is made entirely of ephemera. As my old haunts disappear into the ether, it is comforting to know that other people are also thinking about them and asking, "What happened to X?". In this sense, the creators of Reply All are filling the role of both sociologists and historians. They probably didn't intend to be the latter, but I'm glad they are.

~~~~~

When I say I feel nostalgic for this old Internet, I don't mean that I miss how things were. The Internet certainly _looks_ better now, and everything is easier more sophisticated. What I miss was the relative smallness of it all. The entire environment has become so noisy in the last few years, especially with the advent of social media, that I eventually found myself gradually retreating from blogging. After a few years on Blogger, I switched over to Tumblr, which was sleek and modern in ways that Blogger was not. But Tumblr very quickly exploded into a complex community whose personality, while exciting, quickly overshadowed the purpose that I wanted it to fulfill. In between, I kept trying to start new blogs on Wordpress, but even that came with more bells and whistles than I wanted.

What I have wanted is simply a quiet place to write that also gives me full control over my medium. That leads me to now. Through a series of non-blogging related events, I discovered GitHub Pages. I have to say, I am actually really excited about this. GitHub Pages is built with the exact philosophy of creating a no-frills website. I am currently writing and saving this post as a file on my personal laptop, and with the click of a button everything is pushed to the Internet. I can customize everything fully. The interface is straightforward and won't change. Everything is visible to me. 

And so here we have it: my new website. It is a blog, but it is also my own quiet corner of the Internet. Let's see how it goes.